# Solana Course - RareSkills

## Commands

### Init project and programs

    $ anchor init solana-course
    $ anchor new day_1
    $ anchor build

### Run solana local (test) node instance

    $ solana-test-validator
    $ solana-test-validator --reset

### Sync keys

    $ anchor keys sync

### Tests

    $ anchor test --skip-local-validator // use (local) test node instance

### Logs

    $ solana logs
    $ ls .anchor/program-logs/

### Wallet

    $ solana address
    $ solana balance
    $ solana airdrop <amount> <address>

## Concepts

Solana uses u64 as the "standard" integer size.

### Arithmetic overflow

If the key overflow-checks is set to true in the Cargo.toml file, then Rust will add overflow checks
at the compiler level. See the screenshot of Cargo.toml next:

### Compute units

By default, a transaction is limited to 200,000 compute units. If more than 200,000 compute units are consumed, the transaction reverts.

- With overflow protection disabled a math operation consumes 824 compute units
- With overflow protection enabled in consumes 872 compute units.

### IDL - Interface Definition Language

Is a JSON file that describes how to interact with a Solana program. It is automatically generated by the Anchor framework.

The instructions field in the `target/idl/day_*.json` file contains the list of public facing functions that the program
supports, roughly equivalent to the external and public functions on an Ethereum contract.

*An IDL file in Solana plays a similar role as the ABI file in Solidity, specifying how to interact with the program’s/contract’s.*

> Anchor interprets snake_case functions in Rust as camelCase functions in the Typescript tests.

### Intro to errors

- Solana has the require! macro which is no different to require in solidity.
- In Solidity, the require statement halts the execution with the revert op code.
    Solana does not halt execution but simply returns a different value.
    This is analogous to how linux returns 0 or 1 on success. If a 0 is returned
    (equivalent of returning Ok(())), everything went smoothly.
- [solana error reference](https://www.anchor-lang.com/docs/features/errors)

### Solana programs deployment

- Solana programs deployed via Anchor are upgradeable (mutable) by default,
    because they use the upgradeable loader and have an upgrade authority.
- A program can be developed and upgraded multiple times while the upgrade
    authority exists; once finalized, the upgrade authority can be removed
    to make the program immutable.
- Deployment or upgrade is controlled by the Anchor CLI. When running tests,
    the --skip-deploy flag prevents Anchor from deploying or upgrading the program,
    allowing tests to run against the already deployed on-chain version.
